All About South Africa, by Philippa Tracey Copyright, Burlington Books 2013, All Rights
Reserved Chapter 1 The Rainbow Nation
How's it? Asked the young man sitting with his friends in the pub.
How's what?
answered the stranger.
I asked how you are, said the young man.
That's how South Africans greet each other.
You're obviously not from here.
No replied the stranger.
My name's John and I'm visiting Cape Town from the UK.
Come and join us, offered the young man.
These are my friends Samuel and Adam.
By the way, I'm Pitt.
Welcome to South Africa, the Rainbow Nation, said Adam.
The Rainbow Nation, inquired John.
How did South Africa get that name?
From all the different cultural groups here, answered Samuel.
Just look at us, Pitt is an Afrikana, I'm African and Adam is coloured.
You know John, it's quite amazing, remarked Pitt.
Twenty-five years ago, we couldn't have a beer together in public.
Why not, asked John?
Because in those days, Europeans weren't allowed to mix with non-Europeans, explained
Pitt.
It's a long story.
I'd like to hear it if you've got the time, said John.
OK, so sit down and I'll try to explain, said Samuel.
Well, you see, the first people to live in South Africa were the koi koi and sand people.
They lived a quiet, peaceful life as hunters and farmers until the Dutch arrived in 1652
and everything changed.
There was a lot of fighting between the Dutch farmers, the Boers and the indigenous people.
Why did the Dutch people come to South Africa, asked John?
They came with a Dutch explorer named Jan van Ribic, explained Pitt.
At that time, traders were travelling from Europe to the far east to buy spices, but
it was a long journey and many sailors died of scurvy because they didn't have fresh
food.
The Cape of Good Hope was the halfway point, so the Dutch East India Company, DEIC, which
controlled trade to the east, sent van Ribic and his helpers to build a fort there as a
kind of refreshment stop.
Passing ships could stop and get fresh provisions and medical care on their journey.
So, I understand the first settlers were Europeans, but then how did the coloureds get
here?
Asked John.
I can explain that, said Adam.
You see, van Ribic didn't have enough men to build the fort, so the DEIC imported slaves
from Asia and Africa to help build it.
When the fort was finished, some of these men stayed at the Cape.
The coloureds today are the descendants of these settlers and their slaves.
I see, but what about the British, asked John?
When did they arrive in Africa?
I think the British landed here in 1795, said Pitt.
Did they have problems with the boar settlers?
Asked John?
Yes, answered Pitt.
The British and the boars never agreed on anything.
The British wanted to abolish slavery and the boars weren't happy about that, so they
took their slaves and left the Cape Colony.
They moved to other parts of the country and established their own two republics there,
the Orange Free State and the Transvaal.
But today South Africa is one country, so how did that happen, asked John?
It took some time, Pitt explained.
Gold was discovered in the Transvaal and the British wanted that gold, so they went to
war in 1899.
That was called the Anglo-Boar War.
So who won the war, asked John?
Well, the boars fought hard, but the British won in the end, answered Pitt.
The British general, Lord Kitchener, put the boars' wives and children into concentration
camps.
More than 7,000 boar fighters lost their lives in battle, but almost 28,000 women and children
died in the concentration camps as a result of poor food and lack of hygiene.
That's terrible, remarked John.
Yes, said Pitt.
So the British took control of the two boar republics and united them with their own colonies,
the Cape and Natal, to form one country, South Africa, in 1910.
And was that the end of the boars, asked John?
No, not at all, continued Samuel.
Because in 1948, the boars, who are now called Afrikaners, came to power and began a system
of apartheid.
What was apartheid exactly, asked John?
That was the system of forced segregation between the races in South Africa, explained
Pitt.
It lasted until 1994, when Nelson Mandela and the ANC, the African National Congress, came
to power.
"'A apartheid sounds terrible,' said John.
"'How did it affect your lives?'
"'Well, as I said, we couldn't sit here together like this under apartheid,' said Pitt.
You can hear more about that from the great man himself,' suggested Samuel.
"'I've got an excellent DVD about Nelson Mandela.
You can borrow it, if you like.'
"'Great,' said John.
"'Cheers,' said Pitt and Samuel.
"'Enjoy your stay in sunny South Africa,' said Adam.
"'Chapter two, the Mandela years.'
"'So let's watch this DVD on Mandela,' thought John, later that evening.
He switched the TV on and a deep voice declared.
"'Allow me to introduce myself.
My name is Nelson Roly-Shla-Shla Mandela.
I became president of South Africa in 1994, but my battle against racial discrimination
started long before then.
This is my story.
For hundreds of years, the blacks of Africans didn't have any rights.
So in 1912, all the African people united to form the African National Congress, ANC.
At the time, South Africa was changing because of the discovery of gold and diamonds.
The Europeans owned the mines.
The Africans weren't allowed to own land, so they worked in the Europeans' mines and farms.
They did the work, and the white men got rich.
But things got much worse when the National Party came into power in 1948 and introduced
apartheid, a system of racial segregation.
Apartheid laws.
All South Africans must register according to their race, white, Indian, colored, or black.
Only whites can vote.
Africans aren't permitted to marry a person of any other racial group.
No sexual act may be committed between a European and a person of any other racial group.
Each racial group must live in its own area.
Blacks must live in the tribal homelands.
All blacks must carry passbooks, identity cards, at all times.
If not, they may be arrested and imprisoned.
These laws were very humiliating.
At the post office, in shops, or at a bus stop, I couldn't stand in the same line as a European.
In the parks, there were separate benches and toilets for Europeans and non-Europeans.
We were treated like dirt, and I was furious inside.
I wanted to take action, so I founded the ANC Youth League together with my colleagues
Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tembo.
We fought for the rights of our people.
Don't think the government didn't try to stop us.
Many of our leaders were living under house arrest or were imprisoned, and I was one of
them.
Later, the ANC was made illegal.
I remember meeting Walter and Oliver in secret to plan our attacks.
Then, in 1963, I was arrested for sabotage and imprisoned on Robin Island, off the coast
of Cape Town.
For eighteen years, I slept in a five-meter square cell.
My bed was a thin straw mat on the floor.
The food rations were small, and the work in the limestone quarry was hard.
I was only allowed one visitor and one letter every six months.
Even worse, when my eldest son and my mother died, I wasn't permitted to attend their funerals.
It broke my heart.
In 1976, while I was in prison, something terrible happened in Soweto, a black township
near Johannesburg.
The black children were demonstrating because they didn't want to be taught in Afrikaans.
It was a peaceful demonstration until the police arrived.
The children started to sing their national anthem in their language, and then the police
started to shoot.
They killed a twelve-year-old boy called Hector Peterson.
The next day, his picture was in every newspaper around the world.
I felt terribly sorry for poor, innocent Hector.
He was only one of hundreds of victims of violence.
When P.W.
Buerta became Prime Minister, he promised to change things, but he was determined to prevent
black supremacy.
During the eleven years he was Prime Minister, nothing changed for my people, and I was happy
when he resigned.
F.W.
de Klerk replaced Buerta and filled me with hope, because his new policy was one man,
one vote.
He immediately made changes in the country, setting political prisoners, including ANC
leaders, free, everyone except me.
Then one day he sent for me.
I was taken secretly into his office in Cape Town.
We were alone, and we sat for a moment just looking at each other.
It was our first meeting face-to-face, and I could tell he was impressed by my dignity
and self-confidence.
By the end of the meeting, we both knew we could do business together.
Next time we meet, we'll discuss ending your imprisonment, he promised me.
de Klerk worked on his new policy for one year and kept it a secret.
Then, on the 2nd of February 1990, the day of revelation arrived.
I was now living in a private home on the grounds of Victor Fester prison near Cape Town.
There I sat, glued to the TV screen as de Klerk began his speech.
I'll never forget that day.
In one action, he announced the end of apartheid and changed South Africa immediately.
The members of my party were free to carry our green, yellow and black flag, and nine
days later, I, prisoner, 46664, was going to walk free.
I couldn't believe it.
On the 11th of February 1990, I was set free from prison after 27 years.
The world was a different place, and it took me some time to adapt to my freedom.
Four years later, the first democratic elections took place, and I became South Africa's first
black president.
My long walk to freedom was over, and my dream of a democratic South Africa was finally coming
true.
Chapter 3 People and Cultures of South Africa
South Africa is home to over 48 million people.
Almost 77% of the people are black or African, 11% are white and 9% are colored.
All of mixed African, Asian and European descent.
Just over half the population live in cities.
Three-quarters of the population are Christian, and the rest are Hindus, Muslims, Jews, or
people without a religion.
The African people are from many different tribes, but most speak Zulu and Coza.
There are 11 officially recognized languages, and most are indigenous to South Africa.
With this mix of cultures and languages, you might wonder how people understand each other.
English is widely spoken and understood by most people.
English is the language of business, politics, tourism and the media.
Road signs and official forms are always in English, and the president makes his speeches
in English.
It meets some of the different people who form the modern South Africa.
How's it?
My name is Emily, and English is my mother Tang, like many of the English speakers in South
Africa.
I live in a big city called Johannesburg.
I'm of British descent, and I love eating fish and chops, but my culture is very different
from the British one.
I live in a beautiful home, and I've got maids who cook and clean.
Some say we live in a golden cage because we must protect our homes against crime with
barbed wire and electric gates.
My name is Willem, and I'm one of about three million white Afrikaners in South Africa today.
I speak Afrikanz.
In Dutch, Afrikaner means African.
Although our ancestors were Dutch, French and German settlers, we've got our own culture
and language.
Most of Afrikan's words come from Dutch, but the slaves and colonists also influenced
it a lot.
English words like apartheid, trek, and world beasts come from Afrikanz.
My dad is a farmer from Paul, a town in the western Cape.
Paul is well known because Nelson Mandela spent three years there at the Victor Verster
prison.
My name is Shaka, and I speak Zulu.
I'm named after the great Zulu warrior, Shaka Zulu.
I love singing and dancing, and I'm a great storyteller.
The Zulu's are the largest African group in South Africa.
We're part of the Inguni people, and our ancestors came from East Africa.
We believe in ancestral spirits and magic.
My name is Pet, and I'm from the Trans Sky, a region in the eastern Cape.
I'm a causeer.
The Koi Koi and sand tribes are part of my tribe, and that's where the name causeer comes
from.
I speak causeer, a language full of clicks because of the influence of Koi and sand words.
I laugh when foreigners try to speak causeer because it's difficult for them to pronounce
the clicks.
I believe in an evil spirit called the Tokolosh, and I visit a witch doctor when I'm ill.
I believe he can help me more than a traditional doctor.
I'm Fatima, and I live in the Boerkop, a colorful Cape Town neighborhood.
I speak Afrikaans, and English, or a combination of the two.
I'm part of a very small group called the Cape Malay Collettes, where the descendants
of slaves from Indonesia, Mozambique, and Madagascar, and we follow Islam.
We love music, and have developed our own style of music.
You can hear it at the lively Cape Minstrel Carnival in Cape Town.
There, people wear costumes and sing and dance in the streets.
Chapter 4.
The Leafs, myths, and legends.
Magic and superstition are an important part of South African culture.
Here are 4 widely held beliefs, which still exist today.
Witch doctors.
The belief in witch doctors is very strong in South Africa.
In fact, about 60% of South Africans visit a witch doctor when they are ill or have problems.
There are 8 times more traditional healers than medical doctors in South Africa.
Witch doctors can be men or women.
Some witch doctors perform spiritual healing by getting advice from their ancestors.
They do this in a ceremony called Throwing the Bones.
They throw bones, animal bones, shells or stones, and interpret their ancestors' messages
from the way the bones fall.
Many witch doctors use medicine called mutti, the Zulu word for tree.
This is made from natural products to cure illnesses or even to help a person find love.
In Johannesburg, there are mutti markets that sell strange objects for use and traditional
healing.
Mutti can contain ingredients like dried animal parts.
The Rain Queen.
The Balobedu people of the Limpopo province believe that the success of their agriculture
depends on a woman called the Rain Queen.
They believe that this mysterious woman has special powers to control the clouds and
rainfall.
In November, the annual rain-making ceremony takes place at the Rain Queen's Royal Palace
in Kettlerkorn village.
People believe that she can bring the rain for agriculture through rituals and by asking
her divine ancestors for help.
She has to provide rain for 150 villages and her people fear and respect her.
Her own gardens are green and have dense vegetation and rare trees as a symbol of her powers.
The Rain Queen has many distinguished servants, all of them from villages all over the Balobedu
kingdom.
They usually come from the houses of the village chiefs.
The Rain Queen is not permitted to get married, but she can have children with honorable men
and these men will provide good successors.
According to custom, the Rain Queen can only communicate with her people through her male
counsellors.
The last Queen, Makobo constant Mujaji, was the sixth and youngest Rain Queen in the history
of the Balobedu, but she died on the 12th of June 2005 at the age of 27.
She left a baby daughter, but the little girl was too young to take the throne.
This usually passes from mother to the eldest daughter.
A Rain Queen's death is supposed to bring natural disasters such as drought, famine and disease.
The Tokolosh In black folklore, many people are frightened
of a mischievous evil spirit called the Tokolosh.
This creature takes many forms but always has a stone in its mouth.
The stone makes it invisible.
According to legend, the only way to keep the Tokolosh away at night is to put something
like a brick or a paint can under each leg of your bed.
Because of this, many Africans raise their beds off the ground so the Tokolosh can't
reach them.
People believe one of the Tokolosh's favourite hobbies is stealing milk from cows.
If the farmer wants to catch the Tokolosh, he gets help from a witch doctor.
The witch doctor makes mutti and after the Tokolosh touches this potion, it becomes visible.
The witch doctor can then kill it.
The legend of Jan Fan Honks During the summer months when the southeast
wind blows, Cape Town's most famous tourist attraction, Table Mountain, is covered with
a white cloud which some people call a tablecloth.
According to an ancient myth, this tablecloth was created by a smoking contest between the
devil and a Dutch pirate called Captain Jan Fan Honks.
Jan Fan Honks lived at the foot of Table Mountain and was a heavy pipe smoker.
Every day he climbed the mountain and sat in his favourite place to smoke.
One day the old pirate was surprised to see a stranger sitting in his place dressed in
black.
The stranger wore a large hat and it almost covered his face.
Jan Honks was astonished when the man greeted him by name and asked for some tobacco.
Fan Honks boasted about his tobacco.
"'Only I can smoke such a large quantity of it,' he said.
Nonsense,' replied the stranger.
"'I can easily smoke as much if not more than you old pirate.'
Overly, Fan Honks challenged him to a smoking contest.
Soon huge clouds of smoke poured from the top of Table Mountain.
The contest continued all day long.
Finally, unable to continue the stranger leaned forward and his hat fell from his head.
It was the devil himself and he was furious.
"'I beat you in the contest devil,' shouted Fan Honks.
Suddenly there was a flash of lightning and Fan Honks and the stranger disappeared into
the smoke.
According to legend, the cloud of tobacco smoke they left behind became Cape Town's famous
tablecloth.
Chapter 5 Places of Interest
The Republic of South Africa is situated at the most southern point of the African continent.
It covers an area of over a million square kilometers.
It has frontiers with Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique, Swaziland, La Soto and Zimbabwe.
The main cities are Johannesburg, Cape Town, Durban and Pretoria.
South Africa is rich in natural resources and is the world's largest producer of gold,
diamonds, platinum, coal and other minerals.
South Africa has got nine different provinces and a very varied landscape including deserts,
mountains and subtropical forests.
There are so many places of interest that it is impossible to cover each province.
Let's look at some of them.
In the western Cape you can find white sandy beaches, forests with ancient trees, nature
reserves, vineyards and mountains.
You can watch whales and dolphins or swim with penguins.
You can even go down to the bottom of the ocean in a cage and observe the great white
sharks.
The sharks sometimes try to eat the metal of the cage but it doesn't taste good so
visitors don't have to worry about becoming a shark's next meal.
The capital of this province is Cape Town.
Many visitors to Cape Town take a boat trip to Robin Island and stand in Nelson Mandela's
prison cell or ride in the cable car to the top of Table Mountain.
The northern Cape is called the Jewel of South Africa because people have found diamonds
there.
But these aren't the province's only jewels.
It is also home to a number of national parks.
The Orange River, South Africa's longest river, flows through the northern Cape.
At the Agrobis Falls the thundering water cascades down from a height of 56 metres.
The Eastern Cape is a surface paradise.
It is located on the Indian Ocean and has got 800 kilometres of beaches.
If you like wild animals you can see the Big Five, Lion, Cape Buffalo, African Elephant,
Leopard and Black Rhino at one of the province's game reserves.
You can also visit some of the battle sites of the Anglo-Bore War and tour Nelson Mandela's
birthplace, the village of Mvezo in the Transchai.
The Green Garden province of Quazulu-Natal borders Mozambique, Swaziland and Lesotho.
Three cultures, European, Indian and Zulu meet here, surrounded by the magnificent 3,475-metre
high Drakensberg Mountains.
You can observe Zulu tribes in their natural environment and stand on the sites of many
battles between Zulu warriors, boar fighters and British soldiers.
The largest city in the province is Durban and this is also the busiest port of South
Africa.
South Africa's smallest province, Chauteng, also known as the Place of Gold is the country's
economic heart.
Johannesburg and Pretoria are situated here.
The gold rush brought people seeking gold to Chauteng.
At first they lived in shanty towns and these later became cities.
The world's largest diamond, the Cullinan Diamond, was discovered in the Cullinan diamond
mine in 1905.
It weighs 3,106 carats and is now part of the British crown jewels.
Another major discovery, a complete 8-man skull and skeleton, dating back more than 3 million
years, was found in the Stirkfontaine caves.
This discovery proved that prehistoric man lived in this area long before the first European
settlers arrived.
Chapter 6 Natural Wonders and Tourist Attractions
Table Mountain National Park Table Mountain National Park is an area of
incredible natural beauty and has got more species of plants than the entire British
Isles.
It is home to two famous sites, Table Mountain and the Cape of Good Hope including Cape Point.
Many different animals live inside the park.
Table Mountain is a significant tourist attraction, with many visitors using the cable car or
walking up to the top.
Around 800,000 people visit Table Mountain annually.
Famous visitors to the top of Table Mountain include King George VI and Queen Elizabeth
II of England.
The view from the top of Table Mountain has been described as one of the most amazing
views in Africa, overlooking Cape Town, Table Bay and Robin Island to the north and
the Atlantic Ocean to the west and south.
Blader River Canyon Situated in the Drakensberg Mountains, the Blader River Canyon is the third
largest canyon in the world.
It has got very unusual rock formations, especially the Borkslug potholes, a series of strange
and spectacular cylindrical sculptures.
According to legend, two million pounds worth of golden diamonds are buried in the canyon.
Apparently, a man named John Holthausen hid the treasure there in 1905.
He went to prison for two and a half years because he stole a horse and carriage.
While he was in prison, he admitted that he and two others hid golden diamonds from the
British.
He knows if this is really true, but treasure hunters are still looking for the missing
millions today.
The Garden Route The Garden Route is one of South Africa's
most popular tourist attractions.
This route extends for 200 kilometres along the Southeastern coast.
The Garden Route offers many activities from searching for wild elephants to travelling
on a steam passenger train.
Two well-known parks, the Wilderness and Tsitsicama National Parks, are situated on
the Garden Route.
Many visitors also travel to the town of Oatthorn to see the Kango Caves.
There, they tore deep inside beautiful caverns and squeezed through extremely narrow tunnels.
Blocran's Bungie The popular sport of bungee jumping started
on Pentecost Island in the South Pacific as a tribal ritual for boys to enter manhood.
Vines were attached to their ankles and tied to two bamboo towers.
Jumpers dived from the highest possible point and stopped close to the ground.
If they succeeded, they were considered a man.
Today, bungee jumping is popular all over the world and the highest jumps are in Nepal,
New Zealand and from Blocran's Bridge in South Africa.
Most people look down from the 216 metre high Blocran's Bridge and tremble with fear.
But those with a passion for adventure enthusiastically bungee jump from the world's highest bridge.
Blocran's bungee jumpers use highly specialised equipment so the risk is very low.
They have to wear a special harness over their entire body because of the extreme height.
So far, there haven't been any accidents, but you may want to say a prayer before you
fly off the bridge and fall down towards the Blocran's River below.
The Palace of the Lost City According to legend, a lost civilisation from North Africa migrated
to Bofututswana in the northwest area of South Africa and built a royal city and magnificent
palace there in the Valley of the Sun.
But one day the city was destroyed by a volcanic eruption and only the palace remained.
The ruins of the palace were discovered next to Sun City, a luxury casino and resort about
a two-hour drive from Johannesburg.
So Kurzner, the owner of the casino, decided to restore the lost city.
He spent millions to create his dream, a combination of the Jungle Book and Indiana Jones and
the Temple of Doom.
The result is the Palace of the Lost City, the world's largest themed resort hotel.
Its 350 rooms are surrounded by an enormous man-made jungle with water cascades, pools
and a massive water park.
The golf course at the Lost City is a worldwide attraction and golfers come from around the
world to take part in competitions there.
But visitors are too frightened to take a ball from the thirteenth hole.
Why?
Because the water around it contains 38 live crocodiles.
Chapter 7 Wildlife in Kruger National Park Kruger National Park
Welcome to Kruger National Park, an enormous game reserve in the Mpoma Langa and Limpopo
provinces in the north of South Africa.
With an area of over 19,000 square kilometres, Kruger Park is one of the largest game reserves
in Africa.
It's even larger than many countries.
The distance from north to south is 360 kilometres, but this journey takes around 10 hours by
car because of animals on the road.
Kruger National Park is named after President Paul Kruger.
After the discovery of gold in the Transval in the 1890s, many people rushed to the area.
Many of them hunted animals for their skin and horns.
President Kruger wanted to protect the animals from the poachers, so he helped to establish
the park.
Kruger National Park opened its gates to visitors in 1927.
Today, more than 1.4 million people from all over the world visit the park every year,
making it one of the top tourist destinations in South Africa.
Visitors can see the greatest variety of wildlife species on the African continent.
They pay a conservation fee to enter the park, and this money helps to protect the wildlife.
Many visitors stay at small hotels inside the park and go on safari, hoping to see the
Big Five, Lion, Buffalo, Elephant, Leopard and Black Rhino.
At Kruger Park, you don't have to imagine a lion standing under a boa-bab tree with the
African sunset in the background.
It's real.
The Big Five When it comes to the Big Five in Africa,
size isn't the most important factor.
What counts is how dangerous it is to hunt the animal on foot.
Lion There are fewer than 21,000 lions in the
whole of Africa.
They are listed as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, IUCN.
A lion can run up to 60 kilometres per hour, and you can hear its roar for 10 kilometres.
Allahari lions are a subspecies in the Northern Cape.
They've got magnificent black mains.
Cape Buffalo Surprisingly, these strong animals are the
most dangerous of the Big Five.
Cape Buffalo have got an exceptional memory, and they never forgive.
If you hurt one, there's a good chance it will hunt you down and kill you.
In Africa, buffalo kill more hunters than any other animal.
Cape Buffalo can even kill lions.
A buffalo is four times as strong as an ox and can easily turn over a car.
African Elephant African elephants are an endangered
species because poachers hunt them for their ivory tusks.
The animal's trunk has got thousands of muscles.
An elephant can kill a lion with its trunk, so it's better not to get too close to one.
Elephants are good ecologists.
They can consume up to 250 kilograms of grass and leaves in one day, but a lot of it is
recycled into the environment.
When the elephant eats seeds, they pass through the animal's digestive system and germinate.
And excrement is also a good fertilizer.
Leopard There are around 1,000 leopards in South
Africa.
Leopards can run up to 60 kilometers per hour, but not for a long time.
They feed mainly on antelope and take their food up into the trees to keep it safe.
Like human fingerprints, each leopard's spots are unique and you'll never find two leopards
with the same spots.
Rhinoceros South Africa is home to almost 5,000 black
rhinos, about 40% of the world's black rhinos.
Rhinos can hear and smell very well, but have poor eyesight.
These heavy animals look very slow, but they're not.
They can run up to 50 kilometers per hour.
The black rhino is the most critically endangered species in South Africa.
In Asia, rhino horn is used in traditional medicine and poachers will risk their lives
to get it for customers in Vietnam and China.
Poachers enter the park illegally and shoot the rhinos with guns.
They cut off the rhinos horn and escape.
The authorities even use helicopters to try and catch the poachers, but are not always
successful.
The worldwide fun for nature is working with South African wildlife authorities in Kruger
National Park to save the rhinos from extinction.
8.
Natural Resources South Africa is the land of gold and diamonds.
But although these natural resources brought a lot of wealth to the country, they also
brought many social and political problems.
Diamonds 15-year-old Erasmus Jakobs didn't know it at the time, but he was going to change
the future of South Africa forever.
It started in 1867 when Erasmus was playing on his farm near Hope Town next to the Orange
River.
He found an interesting stone and used it to play a game called Five Stones.
He then gave the stone to his neighbor and soon it reached the Civil Commissioner.
I believe it's a diamond, the Commissioner declared.
The diamond became known as the Eureka, the first of many to be discovered in South Africa.
A few years later, more diamonds were found in New Rush, today's Kimberley.
As a result of this, thousands of hopeful people suddenly appeared to dig for diamonds.
This led to the establishment of the Kimberley mine, known today as the Big Hole.
The enormous man-made hole is visible from space.
It is 215 metres deep and 2722 kilograms of diamonds were found there.
The Kimberley mine was closed in 1914.
Gold.
In 1886, pieces of gold were discovered on a farm called Langlachte in the Transvaal.
This led to a further discovery of a gold reef 50 kilometres long.
As a result, people came from near and far in search of the gold and the farm became
a big mining camp.
In time, the tents in the mining camp were replaced with houses, offices and shops.
The noisy streets were filled with oxwagons and horses, but the loudest sound came from
the crushing of rocks in the mines.
You could hear it day and night.
Soon there were a number of mining towns and the area became known as the Vipvauterstrand.
The mining town of Langlachte became Johannesburg.
Then it became the biggest town in the Transvaal and was known as the City of Gold.
South Africa became the biggest gold-producing country in the world.
Rich white men made a lot of money from the gold mines, but the African mine workers suffered
terribly.
Johannesburg certainly wasn't a city of gold for them.
Hallelujah.
Every day I thank the Lord that I'm still alive.
I don't know how we're able to work in the gold mines under such terrible conditions.
The boss hits and kicks us and we aren't allowed to talk, so the time passes very slowly.
The work is hard and the hours are long.
But what can I do?
I need money for my family.
Yesterday, the mine flooded again and my dear friend Simelo was killed.
They rest in peace.
I've developed a skin problem from the dirty water.
The boss gave us all rubber gum boots to protect our feet, but that's only because he doesn't
want to spend money on a drainage system.
The boots don't help very much, but at least we can hit them to send messages to each other
instead of talking.
They also make very good musical instruments.
They can separate us from our families, but they can't take our roots from us.
Africa is in our blood and we'll always have our traditional dances to remember our culture
and give us hope.
Next week some important visitors are coming to the mine and we're going to entertain them.
We'll sing songs about our lives, the bad working conditions and our cruel boss.
Of course the visitors won't understand a word because they don't speak our language.
Chapter 9 – Food
The influence of South Africa's different ethnic groups on local food makes a visit to
a restaurant and interesting experience.
Together, these cultural groups give the country its rainbow menu.
The Bantu, as the blacks were known then, taught the early settlers how to grow vegetables
and introduce them to modern agriculture.
The Zulu people introduced the settlers to Mili Mule, a soft cereal made from cornmeal.
The slaves from the east, mostly from Malaysia, brought various spices with them and added
interesting tastes to Dutch and English cooking.
The French Huguenots came to the Cape and transformed part of the land into a fertile
wine growing area called Frenchuk, French Corner.
They planted vineyards there and turned South Africa into one of the world's leading producers
of wine.
The Germans introduced baked goods and cakes and the British brought meat pies.
The Indians worked in the sugarcane fields in Durban.
When their 10-year contracts were over they stayed and Indian cooking became very popular.
Today, Korean rice is a national dish in South Africa.
Barbecues
South Africans are meat lovers and no Sunday meal is complete without a brigh.
This is the South African word for a barbecue and almost every house has got one in its
garden.
This tradition comes from the 17th century when the French Huguenots and Dutch settlers
cook their meat on open fires.
Today, a favourite brigh meat is a German sausage made from beef or pork.
South Africans call it burevos, the African word for farmer's sausage.
Bunny chow
In Durban, you can see street vendors selling some strange-looking bread wrapped in newspaper.
Don't worry, bunny chow is a popular dish made with Indian curry, not baby rabbits.
A hole is made in a quarter, half or whole loaf of white bread and it is then filled
with beef, chicken, lamb or bean curry.
The sauce from the meat is absorbed by the bread, giving it a delicious taste.
The origin of bunny chow isn't clear, but many believe Indian merchants first served
it in a Durban restaurant.
Under apartheid, certain cafes were only open to whites.
The solution was to serve Indian plantation workers through back windows, but the traditional
Indian food was not easy to serve as fast food, so the cafe owners used bread filled
with curry instead.
A funny bunny is made from the middle of the loaf, so there's no hard bit at the bottom.
You have to hold it firmly, or you'll soon find out why it's called a funny bunny.
Biltong Biltong is dried meat and South Africans
love it.
There are different types like beef and ostrich biltong.
Where does biltong come from?
After a hunt, the sand tribe took the meat and cut it into pieces.
They hung it in the sun to dry for up to two weeks, so they would have meat when they
really needed it.
The Dutch also ate a kind of dried meat, but it was made a bit differently.
They added spices and vinegar to preserve it.
The boars liked this idea and started to copy it.
If you haven't tasted biltong, you haven't lived.
Mapani Worms Now you know about the Big Five, but have
you heard of the Big Twelve?
This refers to twelve African insects.
The Mapani Worm, the green and blue caterpillar of the Emperor Moth, is one of these.
It feeds mainly on the leaves of the Mapani tree, and that's the reason for its name.
This fascinating little worm is a local delicacy for people in the northern parts of South Africa
and is served in many restaurants.
In local markets, you can see large bags of sun-dried Mapani worms hanging in the shops.
How are the worms cooked?
Then and children pick the caterpillars by hand and then extract their green insides.
Then they boil the worms and put them in the sun to dry.
You can eat them fried or grilled, or even cook them in a pot with onions and tomatoes.
Some people like them dried and crunchy like potato crisps.
Although not for the faint-hearted, a dish of Mapani worms is a great substitute for
a steak because they contain three times more protein than beef.
Fifteen worms a day give you all the calcium, iron and vitamin B2 you need.
Just make sure they're the biggest fattest ones with the most protein.
Chapter 10.
Art.
From the street markets to the townships and cities, art is all around.
You can see it in the traditional African masks, the colourful beaded jewellery and
the incredible township art.
South African art comes in many different forms, but every piece has got one thing in common.
It tells a story.
Beading is a very popular art form in South Africa and you can see amazing beaded wire
animals everywhere.
These are mainly made by Zimbabwean immigrants and sold at the side of the road.
Many of these immigrants were unable to find work and have used their creative skills
to start their own roadside business.
You can stop and buy one for a small price.
It's not unusual to see tourists leaving South Africa carrying huge beaded giraffes or antelopes
far too big to put in a suitcase.
This woman is from the Underbelly tribe, descendants of Zulu and Coza tribes.
The Underbelly are known for their traditional beadwork.
Beaded clothes and jewellery are worn at ceremonies and are used to decorate things.
As you can see, the woman is wearing a lot of beadwork.
It's a sign of her status and you can be sure she sat for hours making all those clothes.
She takes one bead at a time carefully choosing the colours and can use as many as 300,000
beads to produce a unique piece of art telling the history of the Underbelly in pictures
and symbols.
When an Underbelly woman gets married, she often works for two to three years on a piece
of beadwork for her future husband's parents.
She knows the quality of her work is important if she wants to be accepted into the family.
The general clothes are also important because the Underbelly believe in life after death.
Over the years, they have incorporated materials and symbols from Western civilisation into
their art.
Many people consider it the most impressive beadwork in the world.
Masks are a very popular souvenir item in South Africa and sold in most fairs.
However, they are more representative of the rest of Africa than South Africa.
Masks represent the spirit of an ancestor or god and they were worn in ceremonies like
crop harvesting, weddings and initiations.
As early as the Stone Age, Africa masks were worn in religious ceremonies, celebrations
and coming of age rights.
These included praying, dancing and singing.
Before a wooden mask was made, the mask maker purified himself and prayed for advice and
help from his ancestors.
He also offered a sacrifice to the tree's god.
When the tree was cut down, it was left for a couple of days.
This let the tree's spirits find a new resting place.
Only after that, the masks were created from the wood of the tree.
Today, Africa masks are made of exotic woods, animal skin or even metal.
They are now considered to be valuable pieces of art and are desired by collectors for the
historic and cultural value.
You can see Africa masks in nearly all art museums throughout the world.
D'Amelie Fennie is one of South Africa's famous artists.
He was born in the Western Cape in 1942 and became known for township art.
This kind of art actually developed in the 1920s but in those days it was called struggle
or resistance art.
At that time, the laws of apartheid forced non-Europeans to live in townships.
The conditions there were terrible and African artists started to show how they felt about
apartheid with colorful paintings.
There was a lot of poverty in the townships and oil paints were too expensive for many
of the artists, so they improvised.
This led to the birth of new township art genres.
D'Amelie often drew on the back of old envelopes using nothing but a ballpoint pen.
That's how he started his career as an artist.
When apartheid ended, township art started to change.
In the past, it reflected a country filled with desperate people and no hope.
But artists in the New South Africa have developed their own unique form of township art.
It's bright, colorful and diverse.
They use all kinds of materials to create their art, recycle plastic bags, all parts
of bicycles, dried tea bags, soft drink cans and many other discarded treasures.
Chapter 11 – Sport
If you want to start a conversation with a South African, you can't go wrong with sport.
South Africans love sport, and once they start to talk, they can't stop.
Although the country has produced some top-class athletes, South Africa hasn't always participated
in international sporting events.
During apartheid, South Africans weren't allowed to play sport internationally for 21 years.
But once Nelson Mandela was set free, the sanctions were removed and South Africa became
a part of the world of global sport again.
Since then, the country has hosted the football, cricket and rugby world cups.
Football
To South Africans, football is more than just a game, it's almost a religion.
It doesn't matter if you're black or white or what language you speak.
Football, or soccer as they call it, is for everybody, even for prisoners.
For a long time, prisoners weren't allowed to play football on Robin Island, so they
made their own balls and played in their cells in secret.
Finally, in 1965, the situation changed and prisoners were permitted to play football.
The following year, five political prisoners formed the Makana Football Association and
organized a league on the island.
They proved that football wins over politics.
Today, most of the players in South Africa's national team are black and the name of the
team is Baffana Baffana, meaning the boys the boys.
A local football game is a memorable experience.
It sounds like there are elephants in the stadium, but it's just South African fans
blowing on their vuvuzellas, long colourful plastic horns.
Cricket
Cricket is South Africa's second most popular sport.
The Proteas is the name of the country's national team.
The Protea is the national flower of South Africa.
In the past, mostly English-speaking whites and Indian South Africans play cricket, but
this is slowly changing.
More and more black people are starting to take up cricket at a young age.
The World Cup is the most important international cricket competition.
It takes place every four years and the best cricket players take part.
The first World Cup was in 1975.
In this competition, the West Indies weren't against Australia and took home the trophy.
South Africa weren't allowed to participate in the World Cup until 1992.
But when they did, they showed the world their talent, winning against Australia in the opening
match.
When it comes to international cricket, it's hard to beat South Africa.
They have had the title of best or second best team in the world for many years.
Rugby
The spring box, South Africa's national rugby team, take their name from the country's
national animal.
A kind of deer.
In the past, rugby was considered a white man sport, played by Africanas, but today it's
a game for all, and once again, South Africa competes internationally.
Hi, I'm Francois Pinot.
I was captain of the spring box from 1993 to 1996, and I led them to victory when we hosted
the Rugby World Cup in 1995.
Before that, Australia never lost a single game, but we beat them and went on to win
against the All Blacks, New Zealand, in the final.
We took the trophy by three points, and it was one of the most memorable moments in
history.
After the match, there was a ceremony, and of course, Nelson Mandela attended.
He was wearing my number six shirt, and he embraced me.
In that one moment, 400 years of suffering disappeared.
It shows you the power of sport.
I felt so proud to be South African.
The Rugby Championship, once known as the Tri-Nations, is another important competition.
The winning team is known as the best international team in the Southern Hemisphere.
From 1996 to 2011, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand competed in this event.
These three countries have won six out of the seven World Cups, so it is considered an
honour to win the Tri-Nations.
In 2012, Argentina were also included in this championship.
Chapter 12, South Africa Today, The Flag of South Africa
The current flag of the Republic of South Africa was adopted on 27 April 1994, after
Nelson Mandela was elected president.
It replaced the old flag from 1928.
The new national flag, designed by Frederick Brownell, was chosen to represent the new democracy.
The only symbolism in the flag is the Y shape.
Some say this represents the uniting of different elements within South African society and moving
forward in unity.
Three of the colours, black, green and yellow, are in the flag of the African National Congress.
The other three, red, white and blue, are used in the old flag of the Transvaal, the
flag of the Netherlands and the flag of the United Kingdom.
White and blue were also found in the old flag of South Africa.
Crime Crime is an enormous problem in South Africa today.
The black and white middle-class communities live in fear.
Their houses are protected by high walls with electric fencing, guard dogs, bars on
the window and alarm systems.
Unemployment levels are very high.
Because of this, criminal behaviour has become normal for many young South Africans and approximately
13,000 children are arrested every month for crime.
There are around 43 murders a day per 100,000 people.
Most victims are the owners of expensive cars and elegant houses.
In 8 out of 10 residential robberies, domestic workers, gardeners and former employees are
involved in the planning.
Hunger and poverty is the motive of 35% of robbers.
Most robbers rob 103 times over a period of 7 years before they are caught.
Poverty As you leave Johannesburg or Cape Town,
you can't ignore the slums at the borders of the cities and in rural areas.
Here you can find around half a million people living in very poor conditions.
Many still live without electricity and water.
A short drive around the suburbs of Johannesburg will reveal the truth.
There is still a very clear division between rich and poor.
This is still causing problems in South Africa, almost 20 years after the end of apartheid.
AIDS AIDS is one of South Africa's greatest problems.
More than 5.6 million people in South Africa today are HIV positive.
That's about 10% of the total population.
It has got the highest number of HIV AIDS cases in the world.
South Africa is trying to reduce the number of new HIV infections and has expanded treatment
for people living with HIV, especially pregnant women.
Last year more than 260,000 people with AIDS died.
South Africa Forecast for the future Mandela's dream
Mandela's dream was to create a country free of poverty and social inequality.
It is dream is far from the reality.
Modern South Africa has a long way to go to achieve Mandela's dream.
Although a truly democratic South Africa seems far away, with careful planning, it can happen.
The first step is to reduce unemployment and to increase the standard of education for black pupils.
An extra 12 million pupils in public schools now have the right to basic education and in
higher education, financial help for studies is available for poor students.
Better social conditions and health education will help reduce the number of AIDS victims
and create a healthier population.
Since April 2010, 500,000 new patients have been given treatment and HIV AIDS deaths have
been reduced by 50% to fewer than 270,000.
The transmission of HIV from mother to child in South Africa has begun to decrease in recent
years from 8% in 2010 to 2.7% in 2013.
Finally, with the help of foreign investors, the economy will grow.
If these steps are taken, maybe 20 years from now, the dream of a democratic South Africa
will replace today's reality and Nelson Mandela's hopes and dreams will come true.
Page 64 Cross-curricular Focus South African Films
Invictus The 2009 film Invictus, based on a true story,
is a drama about the events surrounding the 1995 Rugby World Cup in South Africa.
Directed by Clint Eastwood, this inspiring film starring Morgan Freeman as Nelson Mandela
and Matt Damon as Springbok rugby captain Francois Pinaire showed how sport could unite
different people.
The film is set in 1995.
Mandela was president of South Africa and apartheid was at an end, but the country was
in turmoil and there was a lot of hatred between the blacks and the whites.
South Africa was going to host the Rugby World Cup.
The blacks hated the South African rugby team because it was dominated by whites, but Mandela
was determined to change this with the help of Pinaire.
He persuaded the mainly black South African sports committee to support the spring box
and met with Pinaire, inspiring the captain to conquer hate with rugby.
The highly motivated Pinaire worked hard preparing his team for the World Cup and slowly won
the support of black people around the country.
By the time the big day arrived, Pinaire proved that rugby could unite a divided nation and
in the final, the spring box led a more united South Africa to victory over New Zealand.
Page 66 Cross Curricular Focus Skin
Skin 2008 was the tragic true story of Sandra Lang.
Although her parents were white Africanas, Sandra's skin was dark and her hair was curly.
An unusual situation, but in a country with apartheid, this was a disaster.
The young Sandra became an outcast because she had dark skin.
In 1965, at the age of 10, she was classified as coloured and removed from school.
Sandra's father, Abraham, couldn't accept this and he fought for her to be reclassified
as white.
He succeeded, but at that time in South Africa, the colour of your skin dictated your life
and Sandra was never truly accepted by the white community.
Sandra felt more comfortable in the company of blacks and Abraham was dismayed when she
fell in love with a black man named Petrus and married him.
Abraham disowned Sandra and didn't allow his wife Sanny to communicate with their daughter.
But Sandra's marriage didn't last because Petrus became physically abusive.
Sandra took their two children and left.
When apartheid came to an end, there was renewed interest in Sandra's story.
She appeared in an interview and Sanny saw her on TV.
She wrote to Sandra, telling her of her father's death.
The two were finally reunited after 29 years apart, only a short time before Sanny's death.